Emily Doran  
Prof. Stone  
MDIA 120-113  
23 September 2020  
 
Film: ​The Greatest Showman ​The Greatest Showman 
Still Image:  
 
Synopsis of Film and Scene Setup  
This image was taken from one of the final scenes of the film ​The Greatest Showman.​ During ​The Greatest Showman.​ During 
this scene, P.T. Barnum goes to the beach to meet up with his wife, Charity, to reconcile their  
marriage. During a lot of the film, Barnum was so focused on becoming successful and making  
money and not at home with his wife and two daughters. In this emotional scene he apologies for  
all of the hardship that he put their family through and says that from now on things will be  
different.    
1.Dominant Dominant 
The dominant in this still image is Charity; she stands out in this frame because of her  
bright blue scarf and light colored top. Although P.T. Barnum is the closer person to the  
camera, our eyes do not go to him at first glance.    
2.Lighting Key Lighting Key 
This image is a combination of high key and low key lighting. There are a variety of  
colors within the image, but the colors are not very vibrant. Since the scene was taken  
during a sunset, the lighting is a little bit dark and dull.    
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
3.Shot and Camera Proxemics Shot and Camera Proxemics 
This is between a close-up shot and a medium shot. It only captures the two actors from  
their chests up. This shot is also a two-shot because it contains two figures; since this is a  
relatively close up shot between a husband and wife, the viewer is able to predict that this  
will be an intimate scene.    
4.Angle Angle 
The angle of this shot is pretty neutral. The camera is very close to eye level; it is tilted  
upward a sliver, but overall very neutral and makes the viewer feel like they are right in  
the scene with them.    
5.Color Values Color Values 
The dominant color is blue in this shot; the sky is blue, P.T. Barnum’s shirt and jacket are  
shades of blue, and Charity’s scarf is blue. The use of the color in this scene is meant to  
symbolize loyalty. Although their marriage went through some hardships, Barnum  
followed her to the beach to apologize and let Charity know that he has changed and will  
never do that to their family again.    
6.Lens/Filter/Stock Lens/Filter/Stock 
A standard lens was used for this scene because there is minimal distortion with the two  
characters. A blue filter is used to make them appear isolated and to enhance the sunset  
beach scene. A standard slow stock is also being used.  
7.Subsidiary Contrasts Subsidiary Contrasts 
After taking in the dominant, Charity, you quickly notice her husband, P.T Barnum. You  
can see the look of distress on his face as he tries to think of the right words to say to  
make things right with his wife.    
8.Density Density 
This image is moderately dense. We are able to see a lot of detail in the faces of P.T.  
Barnum and Charity; we also can see full details of their clothing. However, there is not  
much density outside of the two of them. The background does not have much density of  
texture at all.    
9.Composition Composition 
The image is segmented into three different areas: the right side with Charity, the left side  
with P.T. Barnum, and the background of the sunset. We first focus on Charity, then our  
eyes glance over to the sunset behind her, and eventually to her husband. This helps with  
the moment of silence that is currently happening while P.T. Barnum tries to come up  
with the right words to say to reconcile his marriage.    
10.Form Form 
This is a fairly open form image. The audience is really brought into the image, but does  
not feel constrained or trapped. We are more focused on the talk that they are about to  
have than on what the surrounding background is like.    
   
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
11.Framing Framing 
The framing in this shot is tight. There is not very much room for either of the characters  
to move around within the frame. P.T. Barnum is taking up the majority of the left side of  
the frame, and Charity is stuck between her husband and the ocean.    
12.Depth Depth 
The image is composed of two major depth planes. The first depth plane is the two  
characters. The second plane is the ocean. It could also be argued that there is a third  
depth plane that consists of the sunset back behind the ocean.    
13.Character Placement Character Placement 
P.T. Barnum stands on the right side of his wife Charity upon arriving at the beach. On  
the other side of Charity is the ocean. This placement signifies the choice that Charity has  
to make; is she willing to take her husband back after all of the pain that he caused her  
and their family?    
14.Staging Positions Staging Positions 
The two characters are standing between a quarter-turn and profile position. This  
signifies the intimacy and love that is about to rekindle between the couple.  
15.Character Proxemics Character Proxemics 
The proxemics in this shot are intimate to personal. The two characters are standing  
pretty close together, and throughout the scene become more intimate as their  
conversation progresses and they reconcile their marriage.    
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
