Christopher Crawley 
9/20/2020 
Mise en scene Assignment 
 
 
Fight Club is about a man, known just as the narrator (played by Edward Norton), who meets a 
strange soap salesman named Tyler Durden (played by Brad Pitt). After the narrator's perfect 
apartment is destroyed, he moves in with Tyler. From there the two men form an underground 
club for men to fight.  
The scene I have chosen is a scene where Tyler Durden pours chemicals on the narrator’s hand 
to teach the narrator to let go and accept things for the way they are. 
1. Dominant 
The Dominant point in this scene is Tyler holding the narrator's hand with the chemical 
burn on it. Everything else on the table is out of frame so you are forced to focus on what the two 
characters are doing. They are also both lit equally to also have you focus on the two characters. 
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
2. Lighting Key 
The lighting in this scene is lowkey (the picture makes it look a bit brighter than it really 
is). The two are sitting in the kitchen of their new house under lights that look like they are about 
to go out. 
3. Shot and Camera Proxemics 
The shot scene above would be a medium shot. Both the narrator and Tyler Durden are 
shot from the waist up capturing them both in frame. It emphasizes the subject of the two men, 
while keeping the setting visible. 
4. Angle 
The camera angle seems to be slightly above both characters. This was done to show the 
power relation between Tyler and the narrator as Tyler is holding the narrator's hand as the 
narrator gets burned by the Lye.  
5. Color Values 
The light and color in this shot seems to be tanned and almost dirty looking. This is to 
show that as the narrator slowly enters more into Tylers world how chaotic it really is. 
6. Lens/Filter/Stock 
This shot was most likely taken with a wide angle lens. The subject being Tyler and the 
narrator are in focus while items around the kitchen are somewhat out of focus such as the pink 
soap and other kitchen utensils. The scene was also probably shot with a slow film stock because 
of how eerily lit the scene is.  
 
 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
7. Subsidiary Contrasts 
The different items on the table such as the soap and the items used to create the soap are 
used to balance out the two main characters in the scene. The chemicals also help to explain the 
significance of the scene because they caused the burn which helps the viewer to understand the 
scene.  
8. Density 
This scene is moderately dense because we are only supposed to focus on the narrator 
and Tyler. Nothing else is happening in this scene besides the two characters interacting.  
9. Composition 
This scene's composition is balanced. I believe this because the negative space in the 
background helps the viewer draw attention to the characters in the middle ground. The objects 
in the foreground help give context to the scene and why they have this chemical in the first 
place. 
10. Form  
This scene has an open form because despite Tyler holding onto the narrator the two 
characters are still free to move around the scene. It is also open form because the two characters 
are free to move around the frame.  
11. Framing 
I believe this shot is loosely framed. Despite them sitting in the kitchen, they have plenty 
of room to move around the scene.  
 
 
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
12. Depth 
This scene has a foreground of the soap and the soap making materials, a middle ground 
of the narrator and Tyler performing this ritual, and a background of the dirty house and more 
chemicals. Tyler and the narrator in the middle ground are the only two things that are in focus 
right now. 
13. Character Placement 
Tyler and the narrator both occupy the center of the middle ground. In the scene Tyler is 
placed slightly above the narrator to show the power dynamic between the two. 
14. Staging Positions 
Both characters are in profile. You can see one ear on both the narrator and Tyler and the 
sides of their faces making it to be in profile. 
15. Character Proxemics 
The characters in this scene are in intimate space. This is because Tyler is holding onto 
the narrator's hand as he burns it with the lye.  
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
